---
title: "Ten Thousand Worlds: Ships"
date: 2023-04-22
thumbnail: "campaigns/ten_thousand_worlds/ships.png"
categories: ["Role Playing Games"]
tags: ["Cypher System", "Monte Cook Games", "Ten Thousand Worlds"]
draft: true
---

_The Ten Thousand Worlds is a (work-in-progress) futuristic science fantasy setting. If you want to get a feel for life in the Worlds, think Firefly, a bit of Guardians of the Galaxy, some Doctor Who and Farscape and a fair bit of The Expanse._

## Space Travel

## Direct Course

### Transfer Orbits

In orbital mechanics a transfer orbit is an intermediate elliptical orbit that is used to move a satellite or other object from one circular, or largely circular, orbit to another. There are several types of transfer orbits, which vary in their energy efficiency and speed of transfer.

* **Hohmann transfer orbit**, an elliptical orbit used to transfer a spacecraft between two circular orbits of different altitudes in the same plane. Within the worlds, this almost always means traveling from one colony or world in orbit around the binary pair to another. Because of the highly fuel-efficient fusion drives used in the Worlds this is the most common type of transfer.
* **Bi-elliptic transfer**, a slower method of transfer, but one that may be more efficient than a Hohmann transfer orbit. 
* **Geostationary transfer orbit or geosynchronous transfer orbit** is usually also a Hohmann transfer orbit. Specifically though, this requires the spacecraft to be stationary above a fixed point on a planet, so the only place this applies is when orbiting Worlds with a significant gravitational mass.

### Delta-V

Probably the most important concept in all of space travel is that of **Delta-V** (symbolized as &#x394;V). In essence, &#x394;V is the total amount by which a spacecraft can change it's velocity with a given fuel load, or more simply the amount of "effort" a spacecraft can exert. Any trip, no matter how short or long, requires a certain amount of &#x394;V expenditure, and the amount of &#x394;V expended directly affects the time taken for the trip. A given spacecraft can expend a small amount of &#x394;V, achieve a certain velocity, and take a particular time for the trip; that same spacecraft might also choose to expend more &#x394;V to cut the trip time.

## Technology

### Fusion Drive

Central to the setting of The Ten Thousand Worlds is a dated but ubiquitous fusion-powered system that allows spacecraft to travel from one end of the Solar System to the other quickly and cheaply. It allows for fuel-efficient, extended periods of high-G acceleration that reduces intra-system trips to days or weeks. Such a propulsion system is known as a **Fusion Drive** or **Torch Drive** and features huge thrust, incredible exhaust velocity and immense power inside a small package. 

Fuel is ejected from the rear of a spacecraft using a linear accelerator and ignited with a high power laser approximately 200-300m from the ship. The resulting explosion is contained and constricted by an intense magnetic field generated by the spacecraft's drive cone, which also acts as a heat and radiation shield. Repeat this dozens of times a second and you have stable thrust, in much the same manner as an Old Earth pulse jet engine. The fuel efficiency of this system means even small spacecraft can carry enough fuel for 20-30 days of continuous thrust at 1g with occasional periods of thrust up to 6-7g or higher if necessary.

The fuel used is Deuterium (<sup>2</sup>H) and Helium-3 (<sup>3</sup>He) or Tritium (<sup>3</sup>H) pellets which can be purchased at resupply depots or produced on-board if the ship has fuel scoops and a processing plant. In the Ten Thousand Worlds, the largest natural source of Deuterium, Helium-3 and Tritium is the gas giant Colchis, but with the right kind of processing they can also be produced from mining water-ice asteroids.

But this is considered a "cruise mode" for most ships, and even higher thrust levels can be created by injecting water into the exhaust to add more mass to the fusion jet. This technique requires a separate water tank, the capacity of which limits the use of "boost mode", but makes accelerations of 12-15g or more achievable for short periods of time.

Any spacecraft will have it's fuel capacity rated in terms of total &#x394;V at Gross Weight Load (GWL) in both cruise and boost modes. Once that &#x394;V is exhausted, the ship is out of fuel and cannot maneuver; it will keep on moving along it's present trajectory until it encounters a gravitational mass strong enough to capture it (or even give it a slingshot) or it hits something large enough to destroy the ship.

Any spacecraft which accelerates at greater than 3-4g has to provide some means for the crew & passengers to mitigate the effect of that acceleration. **Vylk Grav-Deck** allows accelerations of up to around 7g to be compensated for normally, along with inertial compensation for maneuvering while under drive. Higher accelerations will "bleed through" the inertial compensators, so additional measures such as gel-based acceleration couches or full immersion acceleration tanks must be fitted for acceleration in excess of 7g.

Routine operation on most ships is to maintain a low but constant thrust throughout the journey with a flip-over maneuver at the halfway mark to switch from acceleration to deceleration. Some captains prefer to use high thrust and coast for most of the journey, the advantage being that without it's drive running the ship is much harder to see or track, the disadvantage being that the ship will be in zero-gravity without its drive, and that can sometimes hamper onboard operations. In general, crews are adaptable to either regime and have extensive experience in zero-gravity.

### Spacecraft Weaponry

Spacecraft weaponry falls into three main categories: light speed weaponry (lasers, particle beams, etc), sublight weaponry (railguns & coilguns), and guided weapons (torpedoes).

#### Light speed Weaponry

Light speed weaponry includes directed energy weapons where the damage effect travels at or near the speed of light, and in general requires no complicated firing solution to be plotted beforehand. These weapons are considered to be direct fire and (practically) instantaneous in effect.

They can be further classified as **Electromagnetic Guns** and their associated types such as lasers and masers (microwave laser), and **Particle Beams** which travel *close to* but not *at* the speed of light.

Lasers are beams of light, and because they represent the closest thing to raw energy we can access, their mechanism of damage is energy itself. Light guns burn their targets with quick, rapid-fire blasts of energy that burrow into targets with almost surgical precision. Their pinpoint damage is actually a disadvantage, since there are plenty of ships that can take a small hole and still operate as if nothing happened. They also have the disadvantage that their effectiveness drops with the square of distance, so need to be used over relatively short ranges or require increasingly large & powerful emitters. Masers work in a similar fashion and have many of the same disadvantages.

Particle beams, unlike lasers, are conventional weapons. There are no fancy quantum interactions here, and no wavelength cancellations or transfers of orbital energy. Particle beams weapons fire streams of quick-moving projectiles, and only really differ from long guns because long guns use a quintillionth of the ammo, and about the same proportion of energy. Particle cannons fire streams of super-accelerated bullets, except they use atoms and small molecules for bullets, and particle accelerators for gunpowder.

Particle beams tend to have a longer range, since most of their damage is done by the transfer of the kinetic energy of a small mass moving at close to light speed, and their velocity does not fall off with the square of distance. However, the particles only travel at *close to* the speed of light, and so require more sophisticated fire control & target prediction in order to hit, making a hit less certain as range increases.

#### Sublight Weaponry

Sublight weaponry is any weapon whose effects travel significantly slower than light speed. Technically speaking, this can include projectiles fired using a chemical explosion (such as gunpowder), but such chemicals are extremely difficult & expensive to produce and, ultimately, the impact velocity of such a projectile is unlikely to do any harm to anything but unarmoured or lightly armoured ships.

Direct fire projectiles therefore, tend to use electromagnetic linear motors to accelerate a solid projectile to extremely high velocities and rely on raw kinetic energy for damage effect rather than carrying any form of explosive warhead. These are **Railguns** (which use two or more parallel electromagnetic rails) or **Coilguns** (which use a series of electromagnetic coils wrapped around a barrel). In practical terms the two operate much the same, and their damage potential at a given calibre is the same, but railguns tend to have longer cycle times (the time between each shot), can fire larger, heavier projectiles, and can achieve higher velocities - they tend to be used as ship **main guns** or **main batteries**. Coilguns, on the other hand, can be made smaller and achieve much higher cycle times and rate of fire. Light coilguns mounted in fast-moving turrets easily find their place as point defence weapons against torpedoes.

Note that either weapon only requires a power source (usually a ship's reactor) and a magazine of projectiles. The projectiles for each weapon differ in their size and makeup, so are not interchangeable - you can't fire a coilgun round from a railgun, and vice versa.

**Torpedoes** are the last type of weapon carried by most ships. These can vary in size from a meter or so in length and a few tens of centimeters in diameter, to several meters long and diameter - the latter being the "station killers". Unlike railguns & coilguns, they travel relatively slowly and their damage effect comes from an explosive warhead of some kind, up to and including nuclear.  What torpedoes are though, is relentless. A torpedo can carry enough fuel for high-G acceleration for a considerable time (sometimes several hours) and an autonomous guidance system that can pursue a ship for days if necessary, closing in on its target invisibly coasting sometimes, maneuvering and striking under high thrust if necessary, making torpedoes the ultimate "fire & forget" weapon.

Torpedo defences vary depending on the guidance system of the torpedo. Torpedoes have the ability to track a ship using lidar or radar, but that give away their position, so they can also home in on drive plumes. Cutting a ship's main drive and using maneuvering thrusters only can sometimes throw a torpedo off enough to escape pursuit. If a torpedo gets close enough and its guidance system senses a possible kill, they will usually accelerate under hight thrust in a final dash to the target. At times like that, a ship's point defence system - typically rapid fire coilguns - might have a chance of putting enough "lead in the air" to shoot the torpedo down. Or maybe not.

## Advanced Technology

### Artificial Gravity

In the Worlds, there are several ways to generate artificial gravity - some easier than others.

The most common form of artificial gravity is **Thrust Gravity**. Take a ship, turn on it's main drive, and the thrust creates a gravity-like force along the thrust axis proportional to the amount of thrust. Depending on how much &#x394;V a ship is willing to expend on a given journey this might be a comfortable 0.6-1.0G or a punishing 3-4G. Spacers have been known to tolerate thrust gravity of 5-6G on short trips when they're in a hurry, but usually anything over 2-3G is not practical or medically advisable for more than a few hours.

The easiest, oldest and most practical way to generate a continuous pull is **Spin Gravity** - take any structure and spin it; a gravity-like inertial force is generated at right-angles to the axis of rotation. This technique can be applied to any size of structure from small spacecraft to giant stations.

The other, much more expensive, way to provide gravity (as well as inertial compensation) is to acquire some **Grav Deck**. This ship module is sold *only* by the Vylk when new and is extremely difficult to retrofit when salvaged from another ship. It does, however, mean that any areas of a ship fitted with Grav Deck will have their gravitational field fully controllable to anything from zero-G up to (usually) 2-3G (although most ships will run at around 0.7-0.8G so that there is enough gravity for passenger & crew comfort but not a full 1G or more).

Given the cost of Grav Deck, the vast majority of ships are either designed to enable spin gravity or will spend most of their time in zero-G or under thrust.

## Savage Ships

For Savage Worlds, ships & space travel work as follows:

- Ships are rated as per the [Vehicle Guide](https://peginc.com/product/savage-worlds-vehicle-guide-pdf-swade/) for size and general capabilities.
- A ship's available &#x394;V can be anything up to double it's size rating. The effectively represents the amount of fuel it carries relative to its overall size.
- The maximum amount & cost of fuel the ship can carry is one unit per ship size per point of &#x394;V (ie: fuel = size * &#x394;V).
- Distances on a 2D map are measured in hexes or squares, each hex/square is one Orbital Unit (OU).
- Travel time between two points is distance in OU divided by &#x394;V expended,in days - the faster you want to get there, the more &#x394;V you need to expend, and 1&#x394;V is enough to get anywhere, it just takes a while.

For example:
- A Freighter is size 16.
- It's available &#x394;V can be anything up to 32, let's go for half of that: 16.
- Fully refueling it takes 16 x 16 (size x &#x394;V) = 256 units of fuel.
- If it wants to travel 12 OU on the map, it can do it in as little as 18 hours (12 OU / 16 &#x394;V = 0.75 days = 18 hours) but that would use up all 256 units of fuel.
- It could also travel that distance as slowly as 12 OU / 1 &#x394;V = 12 days and expend only 16 units of fuel.

<!--
## Cypher System Ships

In accordance with the vehicle rules from the **Cypher System Core Rulebook (Revised)** and the **Stars Are Fire** supplement, ships in the Worlds are defined by a series of characteristics and modifiers, as follows:

| Level | Ship Type |
| --- | ---|
| 1 | One-man work pod, light racer or fighter  |
| 2 | Short-Range Shuttle |
| 3 | Long Range Shuttle, Patrol Boat or Scout |
| 4 | Corvette, Light Freighter, Yacht |
| 5 | Destroyer, Frigate, Asteroid Miner |
| 6 | Cruiser, Cruise Liner |
| 7 | Heavy Cruiser or Freighter |
| 8 | Carrier, Battleship or Heavy Freighter |
| 9 | Heavy Carrier or Dreadnought, Gas Mining Platforms |
| 10 | Colony Ship  |
| 11-15 | Immobile structures: large asteroids, stations, Worlds and colonies  |

To further distinguish individual ships

| Modifier | Description |
| --- | --- |
| **Tech Rating** | Each ship has a Tech Rating of _Influx, Early, Contemporary_ or _Advanced_. Ships gain an easing or hindrance of task rolls for each difference in tech level between them and a target ship, to a maximum of 2 steps. |
| **Superior Weapons** | Superior Weapons (rated at 1 or 2 points) act as an asset, easing attack task rolls by up to two steps against other ships. |
| **Superior Armor** | Superior Armor provides additional passive defense against incoming weapons by easing defensive task rolls by 1 or 2 steps. |
| **Point Defense Systems** | Point Defense Systems (usually rapid-fire lasers or coilguns) provide additional last-second defensive capability but only against incoming powered projectiles (torpedoes or missiles) by acting as a 1 or 2 point asset when making defense task rolls. | 
-->

## Design Notes

When thinking about how ships would work in the Ten Thousand Worlds, I wanted to stick to a few principles:

* **Realistic, but playable physics:** Ships would be more like those in Babylon 5 or The Expanse than Star Wars or Star Trek. With most game systems, this wouldn't make much of a difference to the way space travel is handled within the Cypher System, but would make the concepts of transfer orbits and &#x394;V management important and give combat more of a "naval warfare" than "dogfighting" feel.
* **No FTL:** The entirety of Human life now exists in a single star system and it's artificial worlds. There is no "Human Empire" spanning hundreds of planets, and more importantly there's no easy way out of this system.
